[flang][cuda] Pass assumed-shape arrays of bind(c) attributes(global) kernels by base address (#199313)
llvm/llvm-project: flang/docs/CUDA.md

<!--===- docs/CUDA.md

   Part of the LLVM Project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
   See https://llvm.org/LICENSE.txt for license information.
   SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception

-->

> # CUDA Fortran lowering notes

Reviewer: We might want a border 1st title for this file since it will likely hold more than just lowering docs.

```{contents}
---
local:
---
```

> Catalog of CUDA Fortran lowering decisions in Flang that diverge from the

Reviewer: Catalog feels weird to me. Just list

Author: Changed to `List`.

> Fortran 2018 standard, for cases the [CUDA Fortran Programming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
List of CUDA Fortran lowering decisions in Flang that differ from normal `BIND(C)`descriptor lowering, for cases the [CUDA Fortran Programming
```

Guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/hpc-sdk/compilers/cuda-fortran-prog-guide/index.html)

> does not specify.

Reviewer: Maybe smth like 

```
List of CUDA Fortran lowering decisions in Flang for cases where CUDA Fortran
interoperability requires behavior that is not specified by the CUDA Fortran
Programming Guide or by standard `BIND(C)` lowering alone.
```

> ## `BIND(C) ATTRIBUTES(GLOBAL)` shape-only dummy arrays

Reviewer: What is shape-only dummy array? Assumed shape?

Author: Replaced with "assumed-shape and assumed-rank".

For a `BIND(C)` procedure with `ATTRIBUTES(GLOBAL)` or
`ATTRIBUTES(GRID_GLOBAL)`, dummies whose only descriptor requirement is shape
(`AssumedShape`, `DeferredShape`, or `AssumedRank`) are passed by base address
(`!fir.ref<T>`) instead of by `CFI_cdesc_t *` (`!fir.box<T>`). `ALLOCATABLE`,

> `POINTER`, polymorphic, coarray, and `BIND(C)` assumed-length character dummies

Reviewer: carry are likely not compatible with CUDA.

Author: dropped polymorphic / coarray / assumed-length character. Only ALLOCATABLE / POINTER left.

descriptor to the kernel, drop `BIND(C)`: a plain `ATTRIBUTES(GLOBAL)` kernel

> keeps the descriptor-passing lowering.

Reviewer: drop BIND(C) might be confusing because if you just remove the kernel then cfi is passed.

```fortran
interface
  attributes(global) subroutine f(d, n) bind(c, name='f')
    use iso_c_binding
    real(c_float), dimension(:), device :: d
    integer, value :: n
  end subroutine
end interface
! interoperates with: extern "C" __global__ void f(float *d, int n);
```

Reason: Fortran 2018 §18.3.7 prescribes a CFI descriptor for these shape
attributes under `BIND(C)`, but the
[`cudaLaunchKernel`](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__EXECUTION.html)
ABI requires `args[i]` to point to a value of the type the C kernel declares
for parameter `i`. A descriptor pointer in `args[0]` would be dereferenced as
`T *` on the device, accessing host descriptor memory and producing illegal

> accesses.

Reviewer: Descriptor of device variable are in managed memory or have double descriptors if globals.

Author: Good catch — rephrased.

> accesses.

Reviewer: What if a kernel want to deal with a CFI descriptor? Is it forbidden?

Author: No, just incompatible with BIND(C) on a kernel. Added a sentence: drop BIND(C) and a plain ATTRIBUTES(GLOBAL) kernel keeps the descriptor-passing lowering.

<!--===- docs/CUDA.md

   Part of the LLVM Project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
   See https://llvm.org/LICENSE.txt for license information.
   SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception

-->

# CUDA Fortran

```{contents}
---
local:
---
```

Implementation notes for Flang's CUDA Fortran support.

## Lowering decisions

List of CUDA Fortran lowering decisions in Flang for cases where CUDA
Fortran interoperability requires behavior that is not specified by the
[CUDA Fortran Programming
Guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/hpc-sdk/compilers/cuda-fortran-prog-guide/index.html)

> or by standard `BIND(C)` lowering alone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I would remove BIND here since the list will likely have other lowering explanations that are not related.

earlier descriptor-of-mutable path and are unaffected. A kernel declared
without `BIND(C)` (i.e., a plain `ATTRIBUTES(GLOBAL)` or
`ATTRIBUTES(GRID_GLOBAL)` Fortran kernel) uses the standard
descriptor-passing lowering instead, which is the form to use when the
kernel needs to access a CFI descriptor.

```fortran
interface
  attributes(global) subroutine f(d, n) bind(c, name='f')
    use iso_c_binding
    real(c_float), dimension(:), device :: d
    integer, value :: n
  end subroutine
end interface
! interoperates with: extern "C" __global__ void f(float *d, int n);
```

Reason: Fortran 2018 §18.3.7 prescribes a CFI descriptor for these shape
attributes under `BIND(C)`, but the
[`cudaLaunchKernel`](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__EXECUTION.html)
ABI requires `args[i]` to point to a value of the type the C kernel declares
for parameter `i`. A descriptor pointer in `args[0]` would be dereferenced as
`T *` on the device: the kernel reads descriptor metadata bytes (`base_addr`,
`elem_len`, dim info, ...) as element data, producing wrong results, and when
the descriptor resides in host memory the device load additionally faults with

> an illegal-access error.

Reviewer: Maybe you can add also that this fits with the reference compiler behavior.
